Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today is a
follow-up episode to the last one,
where we looked at the strange life
of Lee Harvey Oswald - his troubled
upbringing, his time in the Marines,
and his defection to the Soviet Union.
And of course, we looked at the
event that he is synonymous with, the
assassination of President John F.
Kennedy.
So, in this episode we will look
at some of the most popular and
most outlandish of the conspiracy
theories about what really happened.
Was Oswald really a lone gunman?
Was he sent by the Soviets?
Or perhaps the CIA?
Was the American mafia involved?
Ultimately, who killed JFK?
On a quick “admin note”, if you haven’t
listened to the last episode, the one
on Lee Harvey Oswald, I would recommend
you do that first, because we will be
referring to the events of November
the 22nd of 1963 in quite some detail.
OK, let’s get right into it and
talk about JFK conspiracy theories.
In 2016, as Donald Trump was campaigning
for the Republican nomination,
he did a phone interview with his
favourite TV channel, Fox News.
One of Trump’s main rivals in the race
at that time was a man named Ted Cruz.
During this phone interview Trump
attacked his rival and began making
some bizarre claims, to say the least.
But he didn’t attack Cruz on policy or
campaign funding - he attacked his father.
Here’s Trump, in his own words.
His father was with Lee Harvey Oswald
prior to Oswald's being, you know, shot,
I mean, the whole thing is ridiculous.
What is this?
Right?
Prior to his being shot?
And nobody even brings it up.
I mean, they don't even talk about that.
That was reported.
Uh, and nobody talks about
it, but I think it's horrible.
Now, I know that wasn’t particularly
easy to follow, but Trump there was
claiming that Ted Cruz’s father was
implicated in the murder of JFK.
As you will know, Donald Trump
has what we might call a selective
relationship with the truth, and indeed
Ted Cruz would come back to Trump’s
accusation saying “this man is a
pathological liar, he doesn’t know the
difference between truth and lies”.
You may also recall that Ted
Cruz would go on to become one of
Trump’s staunchest supporters but
that is a story for another day.
What we are asking today is what
was a potential presidential
nominee - indeed, the future
president - doing spreading conspiracy
theories about Lee Harvey Oswald?
He was, of course, trying to
discredit his political rival,
but perhaps it was more than that.
Perhaps Trump was appealing to a
specific section of the American
voters - those inclined to believe
in conspiracy theories and distrust
the official version of events.
And here he was talking about the most
popular American conspiracy theory of all
time, the theory that there was something
fishy about the assassination of JFK.
Now, in the aftermath of Kennedy’s
assassination, at the end of November of
1963, there was an official commission
set up to investigate what had happened
and how the former President was killed.
It was called the Warren Commission,
and was led by a man named Earl
Warren, a highly  respected
US lawyer and politician.
It concluded that both Oswald and Ruby
were lone gunmen - that is to say,
acting as two independent shooters.
Oswald killed Kennedy and Ruby
then killed Oswald without any
outside help or bigger conspiracy.
Yet as you heard in the previous
episode, this official verdict
was not accepted by everyone.
Indeed, one survey now suggests that
a whopping 81% of Americans don’t
believe the official version of events.
Even back then, in the immediate
aftermath of the assassination, there were
plenty of Americans who were sceptical
of the official version of events.
Polling based on data taken from
December of 1963 - so, just weeks
after Kennedy’s death - found that 52
percent of Americans believed more than
one person was involved, and only 29
percent believed Oswald acted alone.
Fast forward  a decade or so to the
mid-1970 and the distrust had grown even
more following the Watergate scandal and
release of the Pentagon Papers, which
proved Kennedy’s successor, Lyndon B.
Johnson, had lied to the American
people about the Vietnam war.
By the way, if you haven’t listened
to episode number 238, which covers
the Watergate Scandal in detail,
you can do that after this episode
to fully understand the collapse of
public trust in American institutions.
But back to JFK.
After new footage of the shooting was
released in 1975, which gave a clearer
but also much bloodier view of the
event, the government created another
committee, somewhat ominously called
the Select Committee on Assassinations.
This committee was tasked primarily
with taking another look at JFK’s
assassination, but it also investigated
another famous assassination,
that of Martin Luther King Jr,
who was assassinated in 1968,
just a few years after Kennedy.
Although the Committee concluded that
there was no evidence of a Soviet
or CIA conspiracy, it did state that
there was, I quote, “probably” a
second gunman on the “grassy knoll”.
A knoll, by the way, is a slightly
unusual term for a small hill, and it’s
so linked to this historical event, in
fact, that if you google “grassy knoll”
most of the results will be about JFK.
As you can probably imagine, this
conclusion sent conspiracy theorists
into overdrive and suggested to
the country that something fishy,
something suspicious, had happened
and that the people had not been
given the full story in 1963.
Since then, hundreds of JFK conspiracies
have emerged and it remains, to this day,
one of the most popular events where the
public don’t believe the official version.
So, what are some of the most
interesting and perhaps even
believable about Oswald and Kennedy?
There are some truly crazy theories
out there, but the vast majority of
JFK conspiracy theories have Oswald
as the shooter - if not the only
shooter - so in today’s episode
we’ll be considering some of the more
plausible, believable and mainstream,
theories that involve Lee Harvey Oswald.
For our first theory, we’re going
to look at the theory that Oswald
was a Soviet hitman sent by the
KGB to kill the American president.
It does seem to make sense to start
here because Oswald did, as we
learned in the previous episode,
defect to the Soviet Union in 1959.
You can certainly see why people
might believe this theory.
It’s persuasive, and like all
alluring conspiracy theories, it isn’t
beyond the realms of possibility.
That a trained marksman who defected to
and lived in the Soviet Union during the
Cold War could, in theory, be recruited
by the KGB to become an assassin.
Now, some believe Oswald was personally
given the task by the Soviet leader
Nikita Khrushchev, and that he didn’t
move back to the United States in 1962
because he wanted to, but to begin
getting ready for his mission: the
assassination of President Kennedy.
The best or most popular evidence for
this theory comes from Oswald’s trip
to Mexico City in September of 1963,
shortly before the assassination.
Many people argue that there’s evidence
that Oswald made contact with a Soviet
spy in Mexico City, someone known as
‘comrade Kostin’, who one book claims
was the head of “the KGB’s Thirteenth
Department for assassinations abroad.”
Where this theory gets really interesting,
however, is that there are some writers
and journalists who claim that the
Soviets then changed their mind about
the assassination plot sometime between
June of 1962 and April of 1963, and
told Oswald the plan was off, they told
him that he shouldn't kill Kennedy.
But Oswald, who was keen to
prove his loyalty to Kruschev
and the USSR, went ahead with the
plan and killed Kennedy anyway.
As you probably remember from the previous
episode, this version of events certainly
lines up with the type of man Oswald was.
He was an outsider, after all, a man
always searching for his place in society.
Believing that the emotionally unstable
Oswald went ahead with the plan anyway
to prove that he really belonged in the
USSR is hardly difficult, and you can
see why some people might believe it.
This leads us to our second theory - that
Kennedy’s assassination was an ‘inside
job’, that is to say, a conspiracy not
by Soviets or other outside forces,
but by American political forces.
And who are we talking about here?
The CIA, of course.
To put it simply, President Kennedy
did not exactly have the best working
relationship with CIA leaders.
Before Kennedy arrived in the White
House in 1961, the CIA had behaved as
it liked without much oversight from the
executive branch, from the president.
This included all sorts of
nefarious, criminal, behaviour
all over the world, including
working to overthrow governments,
such as in Guatemala and Iran.
Kennedy changed all of that, and
preferred to take a more public,
diplomatic approach to foreign affairs.
In fact, it's even been reported that
Kennedy once said he wished "to splinter
the CIA into a thousand pieces and
scatter it to the winds" after the
disastrous Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba.
Though there are some who believe that
Oswald was working directly with the
CIA, if we consider what we learned
about him in the previous episode, we
know that’s probably unlikely - Oswald
hated American capitalism and the US
government, after all, and he was a loose
cannon, he wasn’t particularly reliable.
So where would the CIA
fit into all of this?
Well, first we must remember that
all this happened at the height
of the Cold War - a time when the
threat of nuclear destruction made
the Americans and Soviets incredibly
paranoid and suspicious of one another.
As we know, Oswald was interrogated
when he returned to the United States
in 1962, but there are several question
marks over whether the CIA would simply
have accepted that a former US Marine
who defected to the Soviet Union had
returned simply because he missed home?
Several writers believe that the CIA was
keeping a close eye, meaning carefully
watching Oswald's movements in the U.S.
They knew that he was involved
in Cuban political activities and
also that he had been to Mexico.
So if they knew Lee Harvey Oswald
was meeting Soviet spies in Mexico
City, presumably to plan Kennedy’s
assassination, why wasn’t anything done?
Perhaps, as some conspiracy
theorists suggest, the CIA knew
about the assassination plan
but did nothing to stop it.
Perhaps they didn’t warn Washington
and preferred to have Kennedy out of
the picture, dead, and return to the
previous non-interventional relationship
between the White House and the CIA.
Therefore, the CIA theory is less that
they were directly involved in the
assassination, and more that they knew
it was coming and did nothing because
it suited their political objectives.
Clearly, the CIA has been involved
in toppling many foreign leaders, so
is it completely beyond the realms of
possibility that it would also topple
its own leader if that person was
considered to be an inconvenience?
For our third theory, we need to
focus on Jack Ruby, the man who killed
Oswald in the underground car park
of the Dallas police department.
As you may remember, Jack Ruby
was a nightclub owner from Chicago
who had settled in Dallas and made
connections in the underground
gambling, drug and prostitution markets,
connections to the mafia, to the mob.
But Ruby isn’t the only person
with mob connections in this story.
The Kennedy family was more than familiar
with America’s criminal underworld.
In fact, many believe that Kennedy’s
father made his name - and most of
his money - selling bootlegged alcohol
during the Prohibition Era, and even that
the mafia fixed the 1960 presidential
election to ensure Kennedy’s victory.
And if you know anything about
Italian-American organised criminals,
you’ll know they don’t do anything out of
the kindness of their hearts, for free.
They wanted a favour from JFK.
And what they got was the opposite.
The mob had extensive business
ties in Cuba, which were put on ice
after the island turned socialist.
The mob hoped that Kennedy would overthrow
Castro and they could open their hotels
and casinos again, but what happened?
Well, the Bay of Pigs invasion in
1961 was a flop, it was a disaster.
Kennedy was blamed for this.
What’s more, Kennedy’s younger brother,
Robert Kennedy, or Bobby Kennedy was
closely investigating organised crime
in his role as Attorney General.
So, is it completely inconceivable
that the American mafia had a
hand in the assassination of JFK,
as a sign of what happens when
you don’t pay back your debts?
In fact, it’s not just conspiracy
theorists who believed this, JFK’s
brother, Bobby Kennedy, according
to one biographer, thought that
the mob killed his older brother.
So where do Oswald and Ruby fit into this?
Essentially Oswald was the ‘fall guy’,
meaning the scapegoat, or person to
publicly take the blame, and in true
Mafia style, Ruby would be the one to
kill him, to   silence him forever.
Now, why would Ruby do that?
Well, many believe that Ruby had more than
mere connections to the mob, but that he
had fallen deep into debt with Dallas’
criminal underworld and that killing
Oswald was how he was asked to pay it off.
This might sound like the plot of an
overly dramatic Hollywood movie, but
when Ruby was interviewed as part of the
Warren Commission investigation, even
though this commission had concluded
that Ruby acted alone and shot Oswald
as revenge for him killing JFK, Ruby
told investigators that he was in danger
and that he wouldn’t tell the truth
until he was moved to a safe location.
Ruby died a few years later, in January
1967, meaning nobody would ever know the
extent of his murky mafia connections.
Now, all of the conspiracies we’ve heard
about so far put Oswald at the centre
of a conspiracy - making him the gunman
on behalf of someone, or something else.
Many conspiracies, however,
including these popular and perhaps
more plausible ones, also suggest
that Oswald wasn’t alone and that
there was more than one gunman.
This theory comes down to one
thing: the infamous ‘grassy knoll.’
As you heard in the previous episode,
there was a small grassy knoll, a small
grassy hill, beside the road  where
Kennedy’s limousine was driving.
In fact, in the aftermath of the shooting,
most witnesses said they thought the shots
had come from the grassy knoll and not the
direction of the Texas Book Depository.
In 1965, interviews with 121 witnesses
found that 51 believed the shots came
from the grassy knoll, 32 from the
book depository, and 38 could not say.
As you might remember, the grassy knoll
was also the first place the police
on the scene searched, before they
went up to the depository building.
But who would the second shooter be?
This is where we get into the complicated
theorising of conspiracies - if there’s
evidence of shots fired from the grassy
knoll, then it could have been anyone.
Was it a Soviet spy working with Oswald?
A mafia hitman?
A rogue CIA agent?
Almost all the Kennedy assassination
conspiracies use the grassy knoll as
evidence to support their theory, but
most seem to think if there was a second
shooter it would likely have been part of
the CIA or organised crime conspiracies,
rather than any kind of Soviet assassin.
Despite this, no evidence of any shooter
on the grassy knoll has ever been found.
Finally, our last theory is a
little stranger: it's that of
the so-called ‘umbrella man’.
On the day Kennedy was killed,
despite it being November, it was
an unusually warm and dry day.
Certainly not the weather for an umbrella.
Yet photos from the assassination
revealed a man holding an open umbrella
in the air as Kennedy was killed.
So, what was he doing there, and
why was he holding an umbrella?
Some conspiracy theorists believe that
this umbrella wasn’t just an umbrella,
that it was a James Bond-style weapon
which could fire tranquiliser darts.
The theory goes that this ‘umbrella
man’ shot a dart from his umbrella to
disable Kennedy, to stop him from moving,
so that Oswald had an easier shot.
As ridiculous or far-fetched as
this might perhaps sound, in 1975
a CIA weapons expert testified at
the Senate Intelligence Committee
that the CIA did have these types
of umbrella weapons back in 1963.
Other people believe that this ‘umbrella
man’ was signalling to the shooter or
shooters, but it’s not entirely clear why.
And as entertaining as a poison dart
shooting umbrella is, it’s one of the
more fanciful, or unlikely, JFK theories.
In fact, in 1978 a man named Louie Steven
Witt claimed he was "umbrella man" and
that it was all a big misunderstanding.
The reason he had an umbrella that
day was, he told the Committee
on Assassinations, because he was
going to heckle Kennedy, meaning
to shout at him, taunt or jeer him.
The umbrella, Witt said, was a way
of mocking JFK's father for his
support of the British Prime Minister
Neville Chamberlain, who had made the
mistake of appeasing Adolf Hitler.
"Someone had mentioned that the
umbrella was a sore spot with the
Kennedy family," Witt explained.
"I was just going along
to do a little heckling.
There are countless conspiracies
about the killing of President John F.
Kennedy, and today we’ve just heard
about a handful of the more popular ones.
This happened almost 60 years ago now,
and anyone suspected of being involved
in some conspiracy is now long dead.
It’s perhaps no surprise that this is the
mother of all conspiracy theories, the
most seductive of them all, filled with
strange clues and unusual happenings.
Perhaps the reason it’s so seductive is
that it’s a lot more exciting than the
truth, or at least, the official version.
The official version is that one
man acted alone, he was simply
a weirdo who failed to belong.
The unofficial versions, the conspiracies,
involve everything from the CIA to the
Soviets, the mafia to poisoned darts.
Perhaps it’s no surprise that we find
these conspiracy theories so alluring.
And with nobody to disprove them, to
tell us otherwise, I think we’ll find
them alluring for many years to come.
Ok then, that is it for today’s
episode on Who Killed JFK?
I hope it was an interesting one, and
whether you knew a lot about Kennedy’s
death, and Lee Harvey Oswald, and the
seemingly endless conspiracies theories
people come up with, or this was the first
time you’d ever heard anything about it,
well I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Which of the theories do
you find most convincing?
Do you believe the
official version of events?
Are there any JFK theories you know
of that we haven't included and
that you find particularly alluring?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.